federalist 85
concluding remarks
hamilton
to the people of the state of new york
according to the formal division of the
subject of these papers announced in my
first number there would appear still to
remain for discussion two points
the analogy of the proposed government
to your own state constitution and the
additional security which its adoption
will afford to republican government to
liberty and to property
but these heads have been so fully
anticipated and exhausted in the
progress of the work that would now
scarcely be possible to do anything more
than repeat in a more dilated form what
has been heretofore said which the
advanced stage of the question and the
time already spent upon it conspired to
forbid
it is remarkable that the resemblance of
the plan of the convention to the act
which organizes the government of this
state holds not less with regard to many
of the supposed defects than to the real
excellences of the former
among the pretended defects are the
re-eligibility of the executive the want
of a council the omission of a formal
bill of rights the omission of a
provision respecting the liberty of the
press these and several others which
have been noted in the course of our
inquiries are as much chargeable on the
existing constitution of this state
as on the one proposed for the union and
a man must have slender pretensions to
consistency who can rail at the latter
for imperfections which he finds no
difficulty in excusing in the former
nor indeed can there be a better proof
of the insincerity and affectation of
some of the zealous adversaries of the
plan of the convention among us who
profess to be devoted admirers of the
government under which they live than
the fury with which they have attacked
that plan for matters in regard to which
our own constitution is equally or
perhaps more vulnerable the additional
securities to republican government to
liberty and property to be derived from
the adoption of the plan under
consideration consists chiefly in the
restraints which the preservation of the
union will impose on local factions and
insurrections and on the ambition of
powerful individuals in single states
who may acquire credit and influence
enough from leaders and favorites to
become the despots of the people in the
diminution of the opportunities to
foreign intrigue which the dissolution
of the confederacy would invite and
facilitate in the prevention of
extensive military establishments which
could not fail to grow out of wars
between the states in a disunited
situation in the express guarantee of a
republican form of government to each in
the absolute and universal exclusion of
titles of nobility and in the
precautions against the repetition of
those practices on the part of the state
governments which have undermined the
foundations of property and credit have
planted mutual distrust in the breasts
of all classes of citizens and have
occasioned an almost universal
prostration of
morals thus have i fellow citizens
executed the task i had assigned to
myself with what success your conduct
must determine
i trust at least you will admit that i
have not failed in the assurance i gave
you respecting the spirit with which my
endeavors should be conducted i have
addressed myself purely to your
judgments and have studiously avoided
these disparities which are too apt to
disgrace political disputants of all
parties and which have been not a little
provoked by the language and conduct of
the opponents of the constitution
the charge of a conspiracy against the
liberties of the people which has been
indiscriminately brought against the
advocates of the plan has something in
it too wanton and too malignant not to
excite the indignation of every man who
feels in his own bosom a refutation of
the calumny
the perpetual changes which have been
rung upon the wealthy the well-born and
the great have been such as to inspire
the disgust of all sensible men and the
unwarrantable concealments and
misrepresentations which have been in
various ways practice to keep the truth
from the public eye have been of a
nature to demand the reprobation of all
honest men
it is not impossible that these
circumstances may have occasionally
betrayed me into intemperances of
expression which i did not intend it is
certain that i have frequently felt a
struggle between sensibility and
moderation and if the former has in some
instances prevailed it must be my excuse
that it has been neither often nor much
let us now pause and ask ourselves
whether in the course of these papers
the proposed constitution has not been
satisfactorily vindicated from the
aspersions thrown upon it and whether it
has not been shown to be worthy of the
public approbation and necessary to the
public safety and prosperity
every man is bound to answer these
questions to himself according to the
best of his conscience and understanding
and to act agreeably to the genuine and
sober dictates of his judgment
this is a duty from which nothing can
give him a dispensation it is one that
he has called upon they constrained by
all the obligations that form the bans
of society to discharge sincerely and
honestly no partial motive no particular
interest no pride of opinion no
temporary passion or prejudice will
justify to himself to his country or to
his posterity an improper election of
the part he is to act
let him beware of an obstinate adherence
to party let him reflect that the object
upon which he is to decide is not a
particular interest of the community but
the very existence of the nation and let
him remember that a majority of america
has already given its sanction to the
plan which he is to approve or reject
i shall not dissemble that i feel an
entire confidence in the arguments which
recommended the proposed system to your
adoption and that i am unable to discern
any real force in those by which it has
been opposed i am persuaded that it is
the best which our political situation
habits and opinions will admit and
superior to any the revolution has
produced
concessions on the part of the friends
of the plan that it has not acclaimed to
absolute perfection have afforded matter
of no small triumph to its enemies
why say they should we adopt an
imperfect thing why not amend it and
make it perfect before it is irrevocably
established
this may be plausible enough but it is
only plausible
in the first place i remark that the
extent of these concessions has been
greatly exaggerated they have been
stated as amounting to an admission that
the plan is radically defective and that
without material alterations the rights
and the interests of the community
cannot be safely confided to it
this as far as i have understood the
meaning of those who make the
concessions is an entire perversion of
their sense no advocate of the measure
can be found who will not declare as his
sentiment that the system though it may
not be perfect in every part is upon the
whole a good one is the best that the
present views and circumstances of the
country will permit and is such and one
as promises every species of security
which a reasonable people can desire
i enter in the next place that i should
esteem it the extreme imprudence to
prolong the precarious state of our
national affairs and to expose the union
to the jeopardy of successive
experiments in the chimerical pursuit of
a perfect plan
i never expect to see a perfect work
from imperfect man
the result of the deliberations of all
collective bodies must necessarily be a
compound as well of the errors and
prejudices as of the good sense and
wisdom of the individuals of whom they
are composed
the compacts which are to embrace 13
distinct states in a common bond of
amity and union must as necessarily be a
compromise of as many dissimilar
interests and inclinations how can
perfection spring from such materials
the reasons assigned in an excellent
little pamphlet lately published in this
city entitled an address to the people
of the state of new york are
unanswerable to show the utter
improbability of assembling a new
convention under circumstances in any
degree so favorable to a happy issue as
those in which the late convention met
deliberated and concluded
i will not repeat the arguments they're
used as i presume the production itself
has had an extensive circulation it is
certainly well worthy the perusal of
every friend to his country
there is however one point of light in
which the subject of amendments still
remains to be considered and in which it
has not yet been exhibited to public
view i cannot resolve to conclude
without first taking a survey of it in
this aspect
it appears to me susceptible of absolute
demonstration that it will be far more
easy to obtain subsequent than previous
amendments to the constitution the
moment an alteration is made in the
present plan it becomes to the purpose
of adoption a new one and must undergo a
new decision of each state
to its complete establishment throughout
the union it will therefore require the
concurrence of 13 states if on the
contrary the constitution proposed
should once be ratified by all the
states as it stands alterations in it
may at any time be affected by nine
states
here then the chances are as 13 to 9 it
may rather be said 10 for though
two-thirds may set on foot the measure
three-fourths must ratify in favor of
subsequent amendment rather than the
original adoption of the entire system
this is not all
every constitution for the united states
must inevitably consist of a great
variety of particulars in which 13
independent states are to be
accommodated in their interests or
opinions of interests
we may of course expect to see in any
body of men charged with its original
formation very different combinations of
the parts upon different points many of
those who form a majority on one
question may become the minority on a
second and an association dissimilar to
either may constitute the majority on a
third
hence the necessity of molding and
arranging all the particulars which are
to compose the whole in such a manner as
to satisfy all the parties to the
compact and hence also an immense
multiplication of difficulties in
casualties in obtaining the collective
ascent to a final act
the degree of that multiplication must
evidently be in a ratio to the number of
particulars and the number of parties
but every amendment to the constitution
if once established would be a single
proposition and might be brought forward
singly there would then be no necessity
for management or compromise in relation
to any other point no giving nor taking
the will of the requisite number would
at once bring the matter to a decisive
issue and consequently whenever nine or
rather ten states were united in the
desire of a particular amendment that
amendment must infallibly take place
there can therefore be no compromise
between the facility of affecting an
amendment and that of establishing in
the first instance a complete
constitution
in opposition to the probability of
subsequent amendments it has been urged
that the persons delegated to the
administration of the national
government will always be disinclined to
guild up any portion of the authority of
which they were once possessed for my
own part i acknowledge a thorough
conviction that any amendments which may
upon mature consideration be thought
useful will be applicable to the
organization of the government not to
the mass of its powers and on this
account alone i think there is no weight
in the observation just stated i also
think there is little weight in it on
another account the intrinsic difficulty
of governing 13 states at any rate
independent of calculations upon an
ordinary degree of public spirit and
integrity will in my opinion constantly
impose on the national rulers the
necessity of a spirit of accommodation
to the reasonable expectations of their
constituents but there is yet a further
consideration which proves beyond the
possibility of a doubt that the
observation is futile it is this that
the national rulers whenever nine states
concur will have no option upon the
subject
by the fifth article of the plan the
congress will be obliged on the
application of the legislatures of
two-thirds of the states which at
present amount to nine to call a
convention for proposing amendments
which shall be valid to all intents and
purposes as part of the constitution
when ratified by the legislatures of
three-fourths of the states or by
conventions and three-fourths thereof
the words of this article are peremptory
the congress shall call a convention
nothing in this particular is left to
the discretion of that body and of
consequence all the declamation about
the disinclination to a change vanishes
in air
nor however difficult it may be supposed
to unite two-thirds or three-fourths of
the state legislatures in amendments
which may affect local interests can
there be any room to apprehend any such
difficulty in a union on points which
are merely relative to the general
liberty or security of the people we may
safely rely on the disposition of the
state legislatures to erect barriers
against the encroachments of the
national authority
if the foregoing argument is a fallacy
certain it is that i am myself deceived
by it for it is in my conception one of
those rare instances in which political
truth can be brought to the test of a
mathematical demonstration those who see
the matter in the same light with me
however zealous they may be for
amendments must agree in the propriety
of a previous adoption as the most
direct road to their own object
the zeal for attempts to amend prior to
the establishment of the constitution
must abate in every man who is ready to
exceed the truth of the following
observations of a writer equally solid
and ingenious to balance a large state
or society says he whether monarchical
or republican on general laws is a work
of so great difficulty that no human
genius however comprehensive is able by
the mere dind of reason and reflection
to affect it
the judgments of many must unite in the
work experience must guide their labor
time must bring it to perfection and the
feeling of inconveniences must correct
the mistakes which they inevitably fall
into in their first trials and
experiments humes essays volume 1 page
128 the rise of arts and sciences
these judicious reflections contain a
lesson of moderation to all the sincere
lovers of the union and ought to put
them upon their guard against hazarding
anarchy civil war a perpetual alienation
of the states from each other and
perhaps the military despotism of a
victorious demagogue in the pursuit of
what they are not likely to obtain but
from time and experience
it may be in me a defect of political
fortitude but i acknowledge that i
cannot entertain an equal tranquility
with those who affect to treat the
dangers of a longer continuance in our
present situation as imaginary a nation
without a national government is in my
view an awful spectacle the
establishment of a constitution in time
of profound peace by the voluntary
consent of a whole people is a prodigy
to the completion of which i look
forward with trembling anxiety i can
reconcile it to no rules of prudence to
let go the hold we now have in so
arduous an enterprise upon seven out of
the thirteen states and after having
passed over so considerable a part of
the ground to recommence the course i
dread the more the consequences of new
attempts because i know that powerful
individuals in this and in other states
are enemies to a general national
government in every possible shape
publius